README.rst, before:

==========
Bitshuffle
==========

Filter for improving compression of typed binary data.

Bitshuffle is an algorithm that rearranges typed, binary data for improving
compression, as well as a python/C package that implements this algorithm
within the Numpy framework.

The library can be used along side HDF5 to compress and decompress datasets and
is integrated through the `dynamically loaded filters`_ framework. Bitshuffle
is HDF5 filter number ``32008``.

Algorithmically, Bitshuffle is closely related to HDF5's `Shuffle filter`_
except it operates at the bit level instead of the byte level. Arranging a
typed data array in to a matrix with the elements as the rows and the bits
within the elements as the columns, Bitshuffle "transposes" the matrix,
such that all the least-significant-bits are in a row, etc.  This transpose
is performed within blocks of data roughly 8kB long [1]_.

This does not in itself compress data, only rearranges it for more efficient
compression. To perform the actual compression you will need a compression
library.  Bitshuffle has been designed to be well matched Marc Lehmann's
LZF_ as well as LZ4_. Note that because Bitshuffle modifies the data at the bit
level, sophisticated entropy reducing compression libraries such as GZIP and
BZIP are unlikely to achieve significantly better compression than simpler and
faster duplicate-string-elimination algorithms such as LZF and LZ4. Bitshuffle
thus includes routines (and HDF5 filter options) to apply LZ4 compression to
each block after shuffling [2]_.

The Bitshuffle algorithm relies on neighbouring elements of a dataset being
highly correlated to improve data compression. Any correlations that span at
least 24 elements of the dataset may be exploited to improve compression.

Bitshuffle was designed with performance in mind. On most machines the
time required for Bitshuffle+LZ4 is insignificant compared to the time required
to read or write the compressed data to disk. Because it is able to exploit the
SSE and AVX instruction sets present on modern Intel and AMD processors, on
these machines compression is only marginally slower than an out-of-cache
memory copy.  On modern x86 processors you can expect Bitshuffle to have a
throughput of roughly 1 byte per clock cycle, and on the Haswell generation of
Intel processors (2013) and later, you can expect up to 2 bytes per clock
cycle. In addition, Bitshuffle is parallelized using OpenMP.

As a bonus, Bitshuffle ships with a dynamically loaded version of
`h5py`'s LZF compression filter, such that the filter can be transparently
used outside of python and in command line utilities such as ``h5dump``.

.. [1] Chosen to fit comfortably within L1 cache as well as be well matched
       window of the LZF compression library.

.. [2] Over applying bitshuffle to the full dataset then applying LZ4
       compression, this has the tremendous advantage that the block is
       already in the L1 cache.

.. _`dynamically loaded filters`: http://www.hdfgroup.org/HDF5/doc/Advanced/DynamicallyLoadedFilters/HDF5DynamicallyLoadedFilters.pdf

.. _`Shuffle filter`: http://www.hdfgroup.org/HDF5/doc_resource/H5Shuffle_Perf.pdf

.. _LZF: http://oldhome.schmorp.de/marc/liblzf.html

.. _LZ4: https://code.google.com/p/lz4/


Applications
------------

Bitshuffle might be right for your application if:

- You need to compress typed binary data.
- Your data is arranged such that adjacent elements over the fastest varying
  index of your dataset are similar (highly correlated).
- A special case of the previous point is if you are only exercising a subset
  of the bits in your data-type, as is often true of integer data.
- You need both high compression ratios and high performance.


Comparing Bitshuffle to other compression algorithms and HDF5 filters:

- Bitshuffle is less general than many other compression algorithms.
  To achieve good compression ratios, consecutive elements of your data must
  be highly correlated.
- For the right datasets, Bitshuffle is one of the few compression
  algorithms that promises both high throughput and high compression ratios.
- Bitshuffle should have roughly the same throughput as Shuffle, but
  may obtain higher compression ratios.
- The MAFISC_ filter actually includes something similar to Bitshuffle as one of
  its prefilters,  However, MAFICS's emphasis is on obtaining high compression
  ratios at all costs, sacrificing throughput.

.. _MAFISC: http://wr.informatik.uni-hamburg.de/research/projects/icomex/mafisc


Installation for Python
-----------------------

Installation requires python 2.7+ or 3.3+, HDF5 1.8.4 or later, HDF5 for python
(h5py), Numpy and Cython. Bitshuffle must be linked against the same version of
HDF5 as h5py, which in practice means h5py must be built from source_ rather
than pre-built wheels [3]_. To use the dynamically loaded HDF5 filter requires
HDF5 1.8.11 or later.

To install::

    python setup.py install [--h5plugin [--h5plugin-dir=spam]]

To get finer control of installation options, including whether to compile
with OpenMP multi-threading, copy the ``setup.cfg.example`` to ``setup.cfg``
and edit the values therein.

If using the dynamically loaded HDF5 filter (which gives you access to the
Bitshuffle and LZF filters outside of python), set the environment variable
``HDF5_PLUGIN_PATH`` to the value of ``--h5plugin-dir`` or use HDF5's default
search location of ``/usr/local/hdf5/lib/plugin``.

If you get an error about missing source files when building the extensions,
try upgrading setuptools.  There is a weird bug where setuptools prior to 0.7
doesn't work properly with Cython in some cases.

.. _source: http://docs.h5py.org/en/latest/build.html#source-installation

.. [3] Typically you will be able to install Bitshuffle, but there will be
       errors when creating and reading datasets.


Usage from Python
-----------------

The `bitshuffle` module contains routines for shuffling and unshuffling
Numpy arrays.

If installed with the dynamically loaded filter plugins, Bitshuffle can be used
in conjunction with HDF5 both inside and outside of python, in the same way as
any other filter; simply by specifying the filter number ``32008``. Otherwise
the filter will be available only within python and only after importing
`bitshuffle.h5`. Reading Bitshuffle encoded datasets will be transparent.
The filter can be added to new datasets either through the `h5py` low level
interface or through the convenience functions provided in
`bitshuffle.h5`. See the docstrings and unit tests for examples. For `h5py`
version 2.5.0 and later Bitshuffle can added to new datasets through the
high level interface, as in the example below.


Example h5py
------------
::

    import h5py
    import numpy
    import bitshuffle.h5

    print(h5py.__version__) # >= '2.5.0'

    f = h5py.File(filename, "w")

    # block_size = 0 let Bitshuffle choose its value
    block_size = 0

    dataset = f.create_dataset(
        "data",
        (100, 100, 100),
        compression=bitshuffle.h5.H5FILTER,
        compression_opts=(block_size, bitshuffle.h5.H5_COMPRESS_LZ4),
        dtype='float32',
        )

    # create some random data
    array = numpy.random.rand(100, 100, 100)
    array = array.astype('float32')

    dataset[:] = array

    f.close()


Usage from C
------------

If you wish to use Bitshuffle in your C program and would prefer not to use the
HDF5 dynamically loaded filter, the C library in the ``src/`` directory is
self-contained and complete.


Usage from Java
---------------

You can use Bitshuffle even in Java and the routines for shuffling and unshuffling
are ported into `snappy-java`_. To use the routines, you need to add the following
dependency to your pom.xml::

    <dependency>
      <groupId>org.xerial.snappy</groupId>
      <artifactId>snappy-java</artifactId>
      <version>1.1.3-M1</version>
    </dependency>

First, import org.xerial.snapy.BitShuffle in your Java code::

    import org.xerial.snappy.BitShuffle;

Then, you use them like this::

    int[] data = new int[] {1, 3, 34, 43, 34};
    byte[] shuffledData = BitShuffle.bitShuffle(data);
    int[] result = BitShuffle.bitUnShuffleIntArray(shuffledData);

.. _`snappy-java`: https://github.com/xerial/snappy-java


Anaconda
--------

The conda package can be build via::

    conda build conda-recipe


For Best Results
----------------

Here are a few tips to help you get the most out of Bitshuffle:

- For multi-dimensional datasets, order your data such that the fastest varying
  dimension is the one over which your data is most correlated (have
  values that change the least), or fake this using chunks.
- To achieve the highest throughput, use a data type that is 64 *bytes* or
  smaller. If you have a very large compound data type, consider adding a
  dimension to your datasets instead.
- To make full use of the SSE2 instruction set, use a data type whose size
  is a multiple of 2 bytes. For the AVX2 instruction set, use a data type whose
  size is a multiple of 4 bytes.


Citing Bitshuffle
-----------------

Bitshuffle was initially described in
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ascom.2015.07.002, pre-print available at
http://arxiv.org/abs/1503.00638.

Commit message:

Strip out HDF5 and LZF support; add SIMD support on Windows builds

README.rst, after:

===============
Bitshuffle Less
===============

This is a fork of Kiyoshi Wesley Masui's that has been radically pared-down to 
remove both the HDF5 and LZF support. This makes the package far easier to 
build an maintain. 

Better support for AVX2 and SSE2 SIMD instruction sets was also added at 
compile time. In particular the compiler was not checking for MSVC flags for 
AVX2 or SSE2 on Windows. This does, however, require the `cpufeature` module, 
which is available via pip.


==========
Bitshuffle
==========

Filter for improving compression of typed binary data.

Bitshuffle is an algorithm that rearranges typed, binary data for improving
compression, as well as a python/C package that implements this algorithm
within the Numpy framework.

The library can be used along side HDF5 to compress and decompress datasets and
is integrated through the `dynamically loaded filters`_ framework. Bitshuffle
is HDF5 filter number ``32008``.

Algorithmically, Bitshuffle is closely related to HDF5's `Shuffle filter`_
except it operates at the bit level instead of the byte level. Arranging a
typed data array in to a matrix with the elements as the rows and the bits
within the elements as the columns, Bitshuffle "transposes" the matrix,
such that all the least-significant-bits are in a row, etc.  This transpose
is performed within blocks of data roughly 8kB long [1]_.

This does not in itself compress data, only rearranges it for more efficient
compression. To perform the actual compression you will need a compression
library.  Bitshuffle has been designed to be well matched Marc Lehmann's
LZF_ as well as LZ4_. Note that because Bitshuffle modifies the data at the bit
level, sophisticated entropy reducing compression libraries such as GZIP and
BZIP are unlikely to achieve significantly better compression than simpler and
faster duplicate-string-elimination algorithms such as LZF and LZ4. Bitshuffle
thus includes routines (and HDF5 filter options) to apply LZ4 compression to
each block after shuffling [2]_.

The Bitshuffle algorithm relies on neighbouring elements of a dataset being
highly correlated to improve data compression. Any correlations that span at
least 24 elements of the dataset may be exploited to improve compression.

Bitshuffle was designed with performance in mind. On most machines the
time required for Bitshuffle+LZ4 is insignificant compared to the time required
to read or write the compressed data to disk. Because it is able to exploit the
SSE and AVX instruction sets present on modern Intel and AMD processors, on
these machines compression is only marginally slower than an out-of-cache
memory copy.  On modern x86 processors you can expect Bitshuffle to have a
throughput of roughly 1 byte per clock cycle, and on the Haswell generation of
Intel processors (2013) and later, you can expect up to 2 bytes per clock
cycle. In addition, Bitshuffle is parallelized using OpenMP.

As a bonus, Bitshuffle ships with a dynamically loaded version of
`h5py`'s LZF compression filter, such that the filter can be transparently
used outside of python and in command line utilities such as ``h5dump``.

.. [1] Chosen to fit comfortably within L1 cache as well as be well matched
       window of the LZF compression library.

.. [2] Over applying bitshuffle to the full dataset then applying LZ4
       compression, this has the tremendous advantage that the block is
       already in the L1 cache.

.. _`dynamically loaded filters`: http://www.hdfgroup.org/HDF5/doc/Advanced/DynamicallyLoadedFilters/HDF5DynamicallyLoadedFilters.pdf

.. _`Shuffle filter`: http://www.hdfgroup.org/HDF5/doc_resource/H5Shuffle_Perf.pdf

.. _LZF: http://oldhome.schmorp.de/marc/liblzf.html

.. _LZ4: https://code.google.com/p/lz4/


Applications
------------

Bitshuffle might be right for your application if:

- You need to compress typed binary data.
- Your data is arranged such that adjacent elements over the fastest varying
  index of your dataset are similar (highly correlated).
- A special case of the previous point is if you are only exercising a subset
  of the bits in your data-type, as is often true of integer data.
- You need both high compression ratios and high performance.


Comparing Bitshuffle to other compression algorithms and HDF5 filters:

- Bitshuffle is less general than many other compression algorithms.
  To achieve good compression ratios, consecutive elements of your data must
  be highly correlated.
- For the right datasets, Bitshuffle is one of the few compression
  algorithms that promises both high throughput and high compression ratios.
- Bitshuffle should have roughly the same throughput as Shuffle, but
  may obtain higher compression ratios.
- The MAFISC_ filter actually includes something similar to Bitshuffle as one of
  its prefilters,  However, MAFICS's emphasis is on obtaining high compression
  ratios at all costs, sacrificing throughput.

.. _MAFISC: http://wr.informatik.uni-hamburg.de/research/projects/icomex/mafisc


Installation for Python
-----------------------

Installation requires python 2.7+ or 3.3+, HDF5 1.8.4 or later, HDF5 for python
(h5py), Numpy and Cython. Bitshuffle must be linked against the same version of
HDF5 as h5py, which in practice means h5py must be built from source_ rather
than pre-built wheels [3]_. To use the dynamically loaded HDF5 filter requires
HDF5 1.8.11 or later.

To install::

    python setup.py install [--h5plugin [--h5plugin-dir=spam]]

To get finer control of installation options, including whether to compile
with OpenMP multi-threading, copy the ``setup.cfg.example`` to ``setup.cfg``
and edit the values therein.

If using the dynamically loaded HDF5 filter (which gives you access to the
Bitshuffle and LZF filters outside of python), set the environment variable
``HDF5_PLUGIN_PATH`` to the value of ``--h5plugin-dir`` or use HDF5's default
search location of ``/usr/local/hdf5/lib/plugin``.

If you get an error about missing source files when building the extensions,
try upgrading setuptools.  There is a weird bug where setuptools prior to 0.7
doesn't work properly with Cython in some cases.

.. _source: http://docs.h5py.org/en/latest/build.html#source-installation

.. [3] Typically you will be able to install Bitshuffle, but there will be
       errors when creating and reading datasets.


Usage from Python
-----------------

The `bitshuffle` module contains routines for shuffling and unshuffling
Numpy arrays.

If installed with the dynamically loaded filter plugins, Bitshuffle can be used
in conjunction with HDF5 both inside and outside of python, in the same way as
any other filter; simply by specifying the filter number ``32008``. Otherwise
the filter will be available only within python and only after importing
`bitshuffle.h5`. Reading Bitshuffle encoded datasets will be transparent.
The filter can be added to new datasets either through the `h5py` low level
interface or through the convenience functions provided in
`bitshuffle.h5`. See the docstrings and unit tests for examples. For `h5py`
version 2.5.0 and later Bitshuffle can added to new datasets through the
high level interface, as in the example below.


Example h5py
------------
::

    import h5py
    import numpy
    import bitshuffle.h5

    print(h5py.__version__) # >= '2.5.0'

    f = h5py.File(filename, "w")

    # block_size = 0 let Bitshuffle choose its value
    block_size = 0

    dataset = f.create_dataset(
        "data",
        (100, 100, 100),
        compression=bitshuffle.h5.H5FILTER,
        compression_opts=(block_size, bitshuffle.h5.H5_COMPRESS_LZ4),
        dtype='float32',
        )

    # create some random data
    array = numpy.random.rand(100, 100, 100)
    array = array.astype('float32')

    dataset[:] = array

    f.close()


Usage from C
------------

If you wish to use Bitshuffle in your C program and would prefer not to use the
HDF5 dynamically loaded filter, the C library in the ``src/`` directory is
self-contained and complete.


Usage from Java
---------------

You can use Bitshuffle even in Java and the routines for shuffling and unshuffling
are ported into `snappy-java`_. To use the routines, you need to add the following
dependency to your pom.xml::

    <dependency>
      <groupId>org.xerial.snappy</groupId>
      <artifactId>snappy-java</artifactId>
      <version>1.1.3-M1</version>
    </dependency>

First, import org.xerial.snapy.BitShuffle in your Java code::

    import org.xerial.snappy.BitShuffle;

Then, you use them like this::

    int[] data = new int[] {1, 3, 34, 43, 34};
    byte[] shuffledData = BitShuffle.bitShuffle(data);
    int[] result = BitShuffle.bitUnShuffleIntArray(shuffledData);

.. _`snappy-java`: https://github.com/xerial/snappy-java


Anaconda
--------

The conda package can be build via::

    conda build conda-recipe


For Best Results
----------------

Here are a few tips to help you get the most out of Bitshuffle:

- For multi-dimensional datasets, order your data such that the fastest varying
  dimension is the one over which your data is most correlated (have
  values that change the least), or fake this using chunks.
- To achieve the highest throughput, use a data type that is 64 *bytes* or
  smaller. If you have a very large compound data type, consider adding a
  dimension to your datasets instead.
- To make full use of the SSE2 instruction set, use a data type whose size
  is a multiple of 2 bytes. For the AVX2 instruction set, use a data type whose
  size is a multiple of 4 bytes.


Citing Bitshuffle
-----------------

Bitshuffle was initially described in
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ascom.2015.07.002, pre-print available at
http://arxiv.org/abs/1503.00638.
